so was this person mentally ill we have
no idea
even if the answer is yes i don't think
that that's an excuse
and i think that we as a society need to
start calling out evil where we see it
so let's just talk about the school
shooting
so the first thing is that i i don't
know what we can do about this so this
happens periodically i think one year
ago
um
we had there was a school shooting about
a year ago and like a bunch of media
outlets and stuff reached out to me on
monday i'm actually going to be
speaking on a panel at the united
nations counter-terrorism
uh division about
violent extremism and like online
communities
um so it's just bizarre that like
literally on monday like there's gonna
be a u.n thing
where we're gonna be talking about this
stuff but i i think that
first of all like my heart goes out to
the community member who had to live
through this
um
my heart goes out to like everyone else
who had to
live through this
um especially those that didn't get to
live through it
and the parents and family members of
those that didn't get to live through it
um
i'm gonna need a second
i think i'm out of tissues gg chat
so
you know i don't know what we do about
this
um
because i think there are sometimes
there are problems in the world that we
don't know what to do with right so like
there are a lot of problems out there
where
people say like i don't know what we can
do
and um that's just not good enough
right so like there are a lot of
problems out there where you can't say
anymore like i don't know what we can do
because there's like literally people
dying
like that's not an exaggeration and this
happens again and again and it keeps
happening and i think that there's a lot
that we don't really know how to
approach this problem
um
so what we tend to do at healthy gamer
is
try to like look at things authentically
right so we try to like be
non-judgmental towards people we try to
um treat them like you know give them
space to like think and understand
and try to figure out what's going on
and do i think that we need to
understand the psychology of school
shooters absolutely
but i think that there's like a flip
side to this coin which is
the more that we propagate this kind of
dialogue and like the more that like for
example there are studies i believe that
show that
increased media coverage of particular
things like suicide or mass shooting
actually propagates like some of those
ideas and beliefs and like leads to more
events so there are studies on suicide
clusters for example where when you like
propagate
like media coverage of a thing that it
increases the behavior of the thing so
personally at healthy gamer i feel a
little bit
hamstrung in terms of approaching this
in the way that we usually do
i don't know
how to deal with this
um because i think that you know really
exploring it could actually have the
opposite effect
and so we want to understand the
psychology of these people hopefully for
the goal of like altering their course
and
my hope is that
if you support people who are struggling
then they won't do bad things
but unfortunately i don't think that
that's true
i think what tends to happen in school
shootings is we talk about mental
illness right so we say like oh this
person was depressed
and so there's like
pathology of evil like that's what we do
as a society now like as awareness and
mental illness has grown
we've actually started to pathologize
like evil
and as a psychiatrist that sort of
pisses me off because i think every time
you label a school shooter is mentally
ill
you're
giving a bad name to people who struggle
with mental illness
and to a certain degree you're providing
an excuse for the shooter
so i i think this is an issue of dharma
and adharma dharma beating being duty
and adharma being not being your duty
and i don't know that this is a problem
of mental illness i think it simply
could be a problem of evil
and one of the downsides of our society
is that as we've stepped away from
religion we've stopped talking about sin
people don't talk about sin anymore
right because it's so tied up with
religious concepts and beliefs and gets
tangled up with other things that
discussions of good and evil have been
reduced to like you know discussions of
psychiatry and psychology and like
you know which in a sense is helpful but
i think that there's a certain point
where you have to take responsibility
for your actions irrespective of like
whether you're mentally ill or not
i also think as a society the more that
we sort of think about oh like maybe
what the world needs is more therapy
like that may be true and it almost
certainly is
and that's the way that i would approach
the problem like i would try to help the
people that are
in their infancy of of becoming a school
shooter and try to alter their course
and at the same time there's a part of
me that says like this is an act of evil
and there should be
no excuses given
i do believe firmly as a psychiatrist
that it is not your fault if you were
mentally ill but it is absolutely your
responsibility
so i have
sympathy for
someone who struggles with alcohol
addiction but i do not provide for them
a single excuse if they drive drunk and
get into an accident and kill someone
this is where if you are struggling with
an addiction or a mental health problem
it is your responsibility and is up to
you to take care of it
and i think failing in your duty to do
that absolutely lays the blame at your
feet
so was this person mentally ill we have
no idea
even if the answer is yes i don't think
that that's an excuse
and i think that we as a society need to
start calling out evil where we see it
the second thing is
you know like
i know what i'm about to say is gonna be
perceived as political and i guess it is
i don't get to determine what is
political and what isn't political
but
i'm about to talk about gun control and
most of what i base this on is like in
my opinion not political beliefs but you
could argue that they are political
beliefs it's like research out of hsph
or harvard school of public health where
like there's a lot of research that's
been done there's some contrary research
to this as well so for example like
australia demographically is very
similar to the united states and the
number of school shootings they have is
like a fraction of what we have because
they have strong gun control laws
there's counter evidence to that as well
so for example massachusetts has
stronger gun control laws and there's
some data that suggests that it doesn't
actually
reduce violent crime
but in my mind like
in growing up in texas i can like
absolutely understand the love that
people have for guns and like i have
neighbors and family members that really
like guns
and that like that's totally fine like i
get that the second amendment is
important to people like i have nothing
against all that
and i understand that there are people
out there
that
like to hunt it's a part of their family
it's a part of their tradition that's
part of their rights like that's totally
fine like i understand that you guys
like to hunt
but the truth of the matter is is that
every year there are people out there
who literally hunt children
like that's what's going on that's not
an exaggeration
someone shows up with a school with a
weapon and then they start hunting and
they hunt other human beings
and so my question to the people who are
like
it i'm not trying to make it political
but like if you are not in favor of gun
control then what i'm curious about is
like what's your plan
like that really that's what i want to
understand and this is where i i'm not
saying it like is a political belief i
don't say it as an indictment i say it
is like a medical doctor and a public
health professional
like what's your plan to protect those
people
so it's fine like i have nothing against
the second amendment i have nothing
against like you owning a gun and i have
nothing against you going hunting
provided it's not kids
and so what i want to understand is like
for people who are
anti-gun control laws
like literally what's your plan and you
don't get to say i don't know or it
shouldn't be this way because this is
science this is fact this happened
yesterday someone showed up at a school
in with michigan and started opening
fire
so like what are you gonna do about that
so it's fine if you want guns like
totally fine but like there needs to be
a plan in place
to literally protect children from dying
and i don't think that that's too much
to ask
i think that we've gotten to the point
where like literally their plan is to
i heard about this recently where they
were building a new school
and the architect designed the school
with
carving hallways
and why did they design the school with
curving hallways
to reduce the line of sight for
potential school shooters
like this is the plan like we're gonna
get you're telling me that schools are
now being designed by
fps developers
like are we gonna have random spawns for
like armor and double damage and
teleporters like
that's literally what this has come to
like your solution is to design a school
and costco by the way started selling
bulletproof backpacks
it's like are you serious that this is
what your solution is that we're gonna
give
kids bulletproof backpacks
and design schools so that they don't
have line of sight to prevent school
shooters
i mean if that's really your answer i
guess it's a answer but it feels like a
terrible answer to me
and on the one hand like
you know like fps designers should be
designing video games not schools
like that's not their job their job is
to design
you know
hallways
for video games not for real life where
there are like 12 year olds and 15 year
olds who are like walking down the
hallway this is absurd
um
yeah so
you know i i recognize once again that
what i said was like political in nature
because gun control is a political issue
and that too by the way like boggles my
mind that
issues like kovid and
you know literally children dying in
schools have become political issues as
opposed to issues of public health or
science or medicine it's like in my mind
those things are quite divorce but that
could be like my ignorance
um
and so i i just want to understand like
for people who are in favor of gun
control like what's the plan yo
like because this keeps happening
i'm sorry people who are anti-gun
control
you know like
like it's to it's cool like you can have
whatever beliefs you want to but then
like what are we gonna do about that
like what's the practical like what does
it look like
um and i encourage everyone you know i
recognize that people may want to bucket
me into a political party or set a
political beliefs
based on my statements
but chances are you'll be surprised at
how incorrect you are based on my
bucketing
um and you may try to reverse bucket me
based on that statement you'll be wrong
there too
um
so i think the next thing that i want to
talk about is like you know what we can
do about it
so
i want to share with you guys i think a
major problem a major public health
nightmare that is already happening
and i don't think many people are aware
of what it is
and that is online drift so there is an
interesting thing happening
to our minds and on the internet that i
don't think many people are aware of
all of the major
content platforms are responsible for
this oddly enough i don't blame them
because i think that they set out
with what i think was the best of
intentions and it's just
a consequence that no one it's an
emergent property that no one expected
when they put together the pieces
and that's online drift so basically any
content creation platform that you look
at
or content amalgamation platform will
serve you things that you like
and so what tends to happen is that
there have been scientific studies
written about this
where like you start off with some mild
piece of content and then over time the
content the platform will serve you
more and more extreme pieces of content
so there's literally this this concept
called online drift where you kind of
start in the middle and then you start
like moving towards extremes so i think
like good examples of this are you know
there are like many subreddits around
loneliness right so there's like forever
alone and then there's also like
relationship advice which is like more
in the middle and then you get to
forever alone and then you maybe get to
like
fds or in cell communities or red pill
or like whatever you get to these like
communities that hold very strong
beliefs
um i'm not necessarily
suggesting that any of those beliefs are
bad but this concept is happening where
the internet by virtue of the way that
online drift happens it's fracturing us
as a society
the second thing about online drift
that's really important is it is that it
is emotionally engaging content that
people select the most
so what happens is like if you look at
twitter like why is twitter such a
popular platform it's because 160
characters is a great way to emotionally
engage people if you look at the people
who are very popular on twitter they're
not necessarily right
they're the ones who emotionally engage
their audience like time and time again
and the people who agree with them think
that they're very very right and the
people who disagree with them think
they're so so idiotic but that person
succeeds because
they've actually emotionally engaged
both sides of the argument so in a weird
way content creation is drifting towards
emotionally engaging content instead of
like accurate content or helpful content
right it's all about like what you're
gonna click on and so what people tend
to click on is that which is emotionally
engaging and so you end up with this
like combined process of like emotional
engagement plus like content being
presented to you which is more and more
emotionally charged
less nuanced less logical less less like
you know dyadic right it becomes like
very monotheistic in nature
and so over time what would happen
what's happening is like we're sort of
like creating these echo chambers right
and that's what the internet is doing
the internet is funneling us
into echo chambers
and one of the things that we've seen is
if you read like manifestos of school
shooters and things like that you'll see
like a lot of echo chamber mentality in
those kinds of things
and so i don't know exactly what to do
about this but i absolutely see this as
a problem
so what i'm going to say now is that you
have to be really really careful about
the safe space that you gravitate to
and this is another thing that started
to happen which is that safe spaces have
started to become breeding grounds of
toxicity
so what happened is like people didn't
want contrary opinions right so like
let's say you've got like
you know a gender oriented sub so you
can look at two x chromosomes or like
men's rights or like whatever so i'm
going to talk about subreddits because
that's what i'm familiar with but you're
going to have a gender oriented
community which understandably the
gender has had bad experiences with
people of the opposite genders so we're
gonna create a safe space just for us
and i think that has a lot of utility to
it has a lot of value to it i'm not
saying it's a bad thing
over time though what tends to happen is
as we knock out contrary opinions as we
knock out discussion because let's be
fair a lot of the people who come in
pretending to discuss are not actually
trying to discuss they're trying to
attack so i understand why it happens
over time what tends to happen is we
create this echo chamber that then like
propagates like more and more extreme
views
and then you end up with communities
like fds or red pill right which is kind
of ironic because they're sort of the
same community it's just
fascinating but
and so this is something that's a
serious problem that i think as a
society we need to be super careful
about like we need to be aware that
content creation platforms as they chase
emotional engagement and dopaminergic
clicks
what they're going to be doing is
radicalizing us in the process and this
is where you can say like oh my god the
content creation platforms are bad
facebook is evil google is evil twitch
is evil
i don't think that that's fair i mean
you can criticize them and they may be
evil i'm not saying it's not my place to
say
what i'm saying is that like my focus
tends to be on individuals and so you
are just as complicit as the content out
like content platform
right because you're the one who's
clicking it so i i don't think it's fair
to just blame and that's another thing
that tends to happen in situations like
this
is everyone loves to blame
the things that don't involve them
so we saw this a lot during the pandemic
where everyone was like doctors are the
heroes nurses are the heroes
like oh my god these people are so great
like they're amazing human beings
and then doctors and nurses started
saying hey you need to get vaccinated
and then suddenly people were like screw
you guys it's the medical establishment
and so it's very easy to applaud
something that doesn't cost you anything
and even easier
to criticize some something and tell
someone else across the street to change
it's really easy to say like oh facebook
is evil twitch is evil youtube is evil
reddit is evil tiktok is evil
you know i'm trying to be like
egalitarian and toss the evilness all
over the place
but the truth of the matter is that it's
easy to say that because it you don't
have to change
right oh it's their fault
i don't have to do anything differently
and this is exactly how we end up with
school shooters because for far too long
people have refused to take
responsibility
so the nra doesn't take responsibility
you know youtube doesn't take
responsibility reddit doesn't take
responsibility the government doesn't
take responsibility legislators don't
take responsibility
individuals don't take responsibility
parents don't take responsibility
friends don't take responsibility
bullies don't take responsibility
oh yeah like it's always like someone
else needs to fix this problem because
they're the problem
and it is because every human mind
thinks that that way that we end up with
the situation that we have
so people in our community ask
how do i do my dharma what is my dharma
and they think it's some grand thing
right they think it's like oh i like how
do i save the world how do i like
you know like become a person who
impacts other people how do i like live
my life with purpose
so this is what i'd say why don't you
start by being a decent human being on a
very small scale
why don't you start by not bullying
someone else
why don't you start by like not dog
piling the kid who's like been
you know
bullied right why don't you start by
being like decent in chat to people who
come on
why don't you start by being decent to
the parent that we had recently
be decent to the women that come on
be decent to the people that you
disagree with
like start by being a decent human being
that's your dharma that's the beginning
of it and that's the end of it
start by accepting responsibility for
what you can change instead of blaming
the world for not fixing things
we see this with our generation too and
i'm complicit with it
where i say oh the boomers screwed us
and it's like i i've been able to vote
for 21 years
and so
for like the first like eight years of
my life like i didn't vote
the boomers didn't screw us
i screwed us
you screwed us
if any of y'all are not participating in
the process if any of y'all are sitting
at home and like not doing anything
about this problem then you are
complicit
it's the only way it works man
is if everyone starts taking
responsibility for whatever they can do
right and and this is the kind of thing
where like we even see like oil
companies do this so i saw this
hilarious thing i think that bp or some
other oil company was like
what are you gonna do like to to commit
to changing like you know to fixing the
climate what is your climate change
pledge hashtag climate change pledge and
someone well what else was like i pledge
not to dump five billion uh barrels of
oil into the ocean
right that's my pledge
and so everyone's talking about like
recycling and like using not
non-reusable straws which is fine like
i'm glad people are doing that
so that is like people who are like you
know not buying plastic straws or like a
step in the right direction but
individual car like corporations need to
accept responsibility as well
so this is where like as a human if you
are gravitating towards communities
participating in communities that are
toxic if you are not exposing yourself
to contrary views with a genuine eye for
discussion
then you are part of the problem
and reddit is part of the problem google
is probably part of the problem twitch
is part of the problem everyone's a part
of the problem that's the whole thing
like it's a worldwide problem so it's
like everyone has a uh some some role to
play
even if it is not this is the other
thing so
even if you are not part of the problem
you can absolutely be part of the
solution and that is part of your dharma
so the only way this works is if like we
all do what we can do even if it isn't
our fault
and so if you want to know what doing
your dharma is it's like be a decent
human being which is harder than it
sounds i make it sound simple but it's
very hard it's be careful what you
consume on the internet
try to be compassionate towards people
that you dislike
and who may disagree with you and we'll
get to that later
and that's your dharma
the next thing that i want to talk about
is like the science of trauma and sort
of
almost responding to the person who
posted who i i don't want to show the
post
um just for the preservation of privacy
and whatnot
so this is there's some things that you
know i don't know if people like educate
like i'm really curious like what that
school in michigan is gonna do for their
students afterward
right so i i haven't seen and maybe this
is just me but like i haven't seen any
clear messaging
on the science of trauma or how you
should respond after a school shooting
like what should you do
so once again this is not like very well
research i mean it's sort of well
researched in the sense that i look i've
learned a lot about it so like i've got
a lot of research like in my brain but
it's not exhaustively studied or cited
or up-to-date
so here's what y'all need to understand
about trauma
so the first thing is that psychologists
discovered that processing trauma is
useful okay so this is like discovery
number one
so then what people decided
psychologists were like oh there's like
genocide going on in africa let's go and
therapise them
so a bunch of like mental health
professionals showed up and they like
process trauma with people immediately
after genocide so you'll have these like
survivor camps right so refugee camps
asylum seekers things like that and
we're going to make the world a better
place we're going to go in and process
that trauma for them we're going to fix
them that's what we're going to do
and so what they actually discovered is
that forcing people to process their
trauma makes things worse
so what tends to happen after a
traumatic event is that we feel numb
we dissociate right we feel detached
from all sorts of things you don't
really like you just kind of feel numb
food doesn't taste great food doesn't
taste bad
things don't seem to be fun you're kind
of like in this fog in your head
you're sort of like numb is the best way
to describe it it's sort of like the
volume on life is turned down the
brightness on life is turned down you
kind of unplug you don't feel connected
with yourself you don't feel connected
with your life there's a dissociative
process that goes on
this dissociative process
is protects you from the negative
emotions right because you just went
through something that was traumatic
so there's like a very like clear
physiologic process that goes on when we
feel strong emotions
our hormones go through the roof our
brain starts to activate in all these
weird ways we enter periods of strong
strong neuroplasticity which means that
our brain rewires
so if you look at the limbic circuit of
the brain the limbic circuit is the
emotional circuit it is right next to
the hippocampus which is the learning
circuit our emotions and our learning
circuitry
is very closely tied together which is
why the greatest teacher for human
beings is negative emotion
this is why you can be married to
someone for 40 years
see them cheating once
and divorce them
because 40 years of good behavior can be
wiped away with one bad lesson
right like that's just how learning
works you can use a stove every day
for 40 years and like one day something
happens a spark lights your house burns
down
and you're like i ain't never touching a
stove again your brain will have like
ptsd from having stoves in the house
that is absolutely the way that we are
are wired so forcing re-experiencing of
trauma essentially reactivates
all of those negative emotions
reactivates the hormonal surges the
physiologic changes that come with the
first round of trauma that wreck your
body by the way
because remember that when you're
undergoing a traumatic experience it's a
survival situation so your body
activates all of these circuits to
survive the next 10 minutes no matter
what happens tomorrow so in that moment
what your body and brain do is they go
all in on survival and they will wreck
the house as a result
the way that i kind of think about it is
let's say you're about to leave for the
airport and you can't find your passport
and your uber is three minutes away you
don't care about organizing things
you're dumping things off the shelves
you're like looking in here you're
emptying out drawers it's a frenzy of a
mess to find your passport within the
next three minutes
and in those three minutes of shooting
for looking for that one goal you will
wreck your entire house as a result this
is what happens physiologically when you
go through trauma
your cortisol level
shoots through the roof your insulin
goes through the roof your
decreases actually
your your blood sugar shoots through the
roof
all of these systems in your body go
haywire for the sake of temporary
survival and we'll clean up the mess
tomorrow
so when you force people
to re-experience trauma before they are
ready
and this is important as well for
certain techniques of meditation that's
why i do not do open awareness
techniques and meditation with traumatic
individuals their mind is working really
really hard to pack away those those
memories
they've worked really really hard to
like bury them in the basement and put
locks and chains and and weights on top
so the trapdoor can never open
and so when you get clinicians that
force people to process their trauma or
you get meditation techniques that let
the trauma come up then
you actually re-traumatize the person
trigger all of those physiologic
disruptions which result in neuroscience
changes those neuroscience changes will
in turn affect your behaviors your
patterns of thought etc
so don't do that
don't force people to talk about things
so then the question is what should you
do
play video games so this is one of the
really fascinating things there was a
study that was done where they had
trauma survivors play tetris i think
and what they found is that tetris is
actually like really really beneficial
for trauma survivors
okay so i know it sounds kind of weird
but like this is where like what do
video games do
they cause us to dissociate right that's
like that's the problem is they cause us
to forget life and push away all of our
cares and worries and problems and as
long as i'm playing dota or league of
legends or valorent or whatever like i'm
not worrying about any of my stuff so
like no big deal
so this is one of the situations in
which video games can truly be
therapeutic
because they assist in the dissociative
process right and this is where people
ask are video games healthy or not
healthy no such thing
every tool has a place
is a hammer a good tool or a bad tool
it's a hammer if you drop it on your
foot it's bad
if you use it improperly you're gonna
break a finger
but used in the right way it can be very
helpful
video games are exactly the same
so oddly enough
i would encourage people to like
follow you what your mind tells you to
do if you want to veg out and play a
video game you just want to play
terraria for like eight hours after a
traumatic event i'd say go for it
let your mind do what it needs to it's
going to be subconsciously processing
stuff and that's actually okay so what
should you do after a traumatic event
play a video game there's actually data
to support that